[docs][Guide] porting from Jekyll to Gatsby (#21921)
gatsbyjs/gatsby: docs/docs/porting-a-jekyll-website-to-gatsby.md

---
title: Porting a Jekyll Site to Gatsby
---

# Jekyll

> [Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/) is a static site generator for your websites. Think of it like a file-based CMS. It takes your content, renders Markdown, Liquid templates, and spits out a complete, static website ready to be served by [Apache](https://www.apache.org/), [Nginx](https://www.nginx.com/) or another web server. In Jekyll if you write a markdown file in the root folder under `_site` thay will considered `pages`, meanwhile if you write `.md` files in `_posts` folder they will considered `posts` that's how jekyll works.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/) is a static site generator for your websites. Think of it like a file-based CMS. It takes your content, renders Markdown, Liquid templates, and spits out a complete, static website ready to be served. In Jekyll, if you create a markdown file in the root folder under `_site` they are considered `pages`. Meanwhile, if you write markdown files in the `_posts` folder they are considered `posts`.
```

## What changes need to be made?

> In order to transition your codebase over to using Gatsby, a few things need to be taken care of to account for the differences between how the projects are set up. First of all Gatsby want to know where to read `markdown` files by using the plugin [`gatsby-source-filesystem`](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/packages/gatsby-source-filesystem/) `( source plugin for sourcing data into your Gatsby application)` but how does it understand markdown format for this we need to use the plugin [`gatsby-transformer-remark`](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/packages/gatsby-transformer-remark/) to transform markdown files into something like gatsby can understand. This plugin is the responsible to read `markdown` files a extract information like the `frontmatter`, the excerpt and convert the `text` into `HTML` ready to be rendered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to transition your codebase over to using Gatsby, a few things need to be taken care of to account for the differences between the project setups. 

First, Gatsby needs to know the expected location of your markdown files. This is configured using the [`gatsby-source-filesystem`](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/packages/gatsby-source-filesystem/) plugin, a source plugin for markdown data. 

Additionally, Gatsby uses the [`gatsby-transformer-remark`](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/packages/gatsby-transformer-remark/) plugin to transform markdown files into something that Gatsby can understand. This plugin is responsible for reading markdown files and extracting information like [frontmatter](/docs/adding-markdown-pages/#frontmatter-for-metadata-in-markdown-files).
```

Reviewer: Wondering if this section is necessary. It is helpful for Gatsby internals context but I'd expect more of an overview at this point in the doc.

Perhaps the sentences about above `_site` and `_posts` should move down here? And then a more general note about how Gatsby uses plugins to locate and transform markdown?

> <!-- The plugin gatsby-transformer-remark is really usefull and also has many plugins to use within it.   -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Development environment

> Gatsby generates websites and web applications for production through a compilation and build process, and it also has tools optimized for local development. To set up the Gatsby [CLI](/docs/glossary#cli) and development environment (if you haven't already) check out [Part Zero of the Gatsby tutorial](/tutorial/part-zero/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gatsby generates websites and web applications for production through a compilation and build process. It also includes tools optimized for local development. To set up the Gatsby [CLI](/docs/glossary#cli) and development environment (if you haven't already) check out [Part Zero of the Gatsby tutorial](/tutorial/part-zero/).
```

Reviewer: This may work best as a "Pre-requisites" section that links to CLI and baseline set up. This should include links to creating a new Gatsby project OR instructions for setting up Gatsby inside a Jekyll project. That feels like the missing piece. Are users meant to port from one project to another? We should be explicit.

## Transition to Gatsby

> Gatsby can help you set up an application and removes much of the configuration headache. However, Gatsby offers some additional advantages like performance optimizations with static rendering and a thriving ecosystem of plugins, To get things set up and running we need to structure our jekyll-site files like this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first step of moving from Jekyll to Gatsby is to restructure your content.
```

Reviewer: This example is a bit unclear to me. Is this the as-is state of Jekyll? What has changed? Why is this the right structure?

```
jekyll-site
  ├── _includes
  │    ├── footer.html
  │    └── header.html
  ├── _layouts
  │    ├── default.html
  │    └── post.html
  ├── _posts
  │    ├── 2007-10-29-why-every-programmer-should-play-nethack.md
  │    └── 2009-04-26-barcamp-boston-4-roundup.md
  ├── _sass
  ├── _drafts
  │    ├── begin-with-the-crazy-ideas.md
  │    └── on-simplicity-in-technology.md
  ├── _site
  │    ├── about.md
  │    └── blah-blah.md
  ├── script
  ├── .jekyll-metadata
  ├── _config.yml
  └── index.md
```

> ### Migrating the markdown / Liquid templates pages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Migrating the markdown / Liquid templating
```

> Create a new folder in Gatsby project under the `src/pages-markdown` for those pages written in markdown format. I left the `src/pages` as default so in future we need it for some javaScript files. Now its time to transfer all markdown files to `src/pages-markdown` like this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a new directory inside your `src` directory called `pages-markdown`. Place all of your markdown files in this directory.
```

```
  src
  └── pages-markdown
      ├── footer.md
      └── header.md
```

> In addition, these pages must be have next properties within the `frontmatter` section:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, you'll need to edit your markdown files and add the necessary frontmatter to each of them. The following is an example of the frontmatter fields you'll need to add:
```

```md
---
layout: page
title: About
date: 2010-11-23 14:48
path: /about
---
```

> Now its time to make Gatsby engine take account into these files to inform where to read them:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the markdown files are in the right place and include the necessary frontmatter, you'll need to configure your project so that it knows where to find them. Update your `gatsby-config.js` file with the appropriate `gatsby-source-filesystem` configuration.
```

> ```json

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```js:title=gatsby-config.js
```

> // gatsby-config.js

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

{
  "resolve": `gatsby-source-filesystem`,
  "options": {
    "name": `markdown-pages`,
    "path": `${__dirname}/src/pages-markdown/`
  }
}
```

> For each file found at `src/pages-markdown` Gatsby will create a `node`. We can extend the `createPages` method and make Gatsby create a new page for each `node`. The steps can be summarized as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each file inside `src/pages-markdown` Gatsby will create a `node`. You can use the [`createPages` API](/docs/node-apis/#createPages) to generate a new page for each `node`. The steps can be summarized as:
```

> In addition, these pages must be have next properties within the `frontmatter` section:

Reviewer: Not sure I follow. What do we mean by "next" properties?

- Query for all the markdown nodes read by gatsby
- Filter those nodes with `layout=page`

> - Create a new page invoking `action.createPage` method and using the template file src/templated/page.js

Reviewer: This guide hasn't talked about creating a page template. Perhaps that should go first?

> ```js

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```js:title=gatsby-node.js
```

> // gatsby-node.js

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

exports.createPages = ({ graphql, actions }) => {
  const { createPage } = actions
  const pageTemplate = path.resolve(`src/templates/page.js`)

  return graphql(
    `
      {
        allMarkdownRemark {
          edges {
            node {
              fields {
                slug
              }
              frontmatter {
                path
                layout
              }
            }
          }
        }
      }
    `
  ).then(result => {
    if (result.errors) {
      return Promise.reject(result.errors)
    }

    const markdownItems = result.data.allMarkdownRemark.edges

    // Create pages and blog post pages
    markdownItems.forEach(({ node }) => {
      if (node.frontmatter.layout === "page") {
        createPage({
          path: node.frontmatter.path,
          component: pageTemplate,
        })
      }
    })
  })
}
```

### Migrating blog posts

> Now its time to transfer all the blog posts in to `src/content` folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now its time to transfer all the blog posts into the `src/content` folder.
```
Since blog posts are markdown as well it probably makes sense to distinguish them up top when the guide recommends that all markdown files are placed in the same folder.

```
  src
  └── content
      ├── 2007-10-29-why-every-programmer-should-play-nethack.md
      └── 2009-04-26-barcamp-boston-4-roundup.md
```

> We need to tell gatsby where to find blog posts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As with the markdown files earlier, you need to configure `gatsby-source-filesystem` so that Gatsby can query the posts.

> Note that this is an additional reference to the plugin. You can configure this plugin multiple times.
```

> ```js

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```js:title=gatsby-config.js
```

> // gatsby-config.js

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

{
  resolve: 'gatsby-source-filesystem',
  options: {
    name: 'blog',
    path: `${__dirname}/blog/`,
  },
},
```

> In Jekyll when we create a new blog post we create something like that `YYYY-MM-DD-some-title.md` so we need to create that `slug` from the file name. The way we can do is using the `onCreateNode` method

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Jekyll when you create a new blog post you use a file name that usually includes a date and a title. Something like `YYYY-MM-DD-some-title.md`. In Gatsby, that means you'll use that filename to create a `slug`. You can use [`onCreateNode`](/docs/node-apis/#onCreateNode) to do that:
```

> ```js

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```js:title=gatsby-node.js
```

Reviewer: Should we recommend people use regex? Or rename their files? Might be worth mentioning both options.

exports.onCreateNode = ({ node, getNode, actions }) => {
  const { createNodeField } = actions

  if (node.internal.type === `MarkdownRemark`) {
    const filename = createFilePath({ node, getNode, basePath: `blog` })

    // Blog files must have format name YYYY-MM-DD-title.md
    if (node.frontmatter.layout === "post") {
      const match = filename.match(/^\/([\d]{4}-[\d]{2}-[\d]{2})-{1}(.+)\/$/)
      if (match) {
        const [, date, title] = match
        if (!date || !title) {
          console.error(
            `Invalid filename ${filename}. Change name to start with a valid date and title`
          )
        } else {
          const slug = `blog/${slugify(date, "/")}/${title}/`
          createNodeField({
            node,
            name: `slug`,
            value: slug,
          })
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

> Now we need to tell gatsby to create a page for each blog post `node`. We can do it extending a bit previous `createPages` method

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you need to tell Gatsby to create a page for each blog post. You can do that by extending the `createPages` method you created earlier.
```

> ```js

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```js:title=gatsby-node.js
```

exports.createPages = ({ graphql, actions }) => {
  const { createPage } = actions
  const blogPostTemplate = path.resolve(`src/templates/blog-post.js`)
  const pageTemplate = path.resolve(`src/templates/
  page.js`)

  return graphql(`...`).then(result => {
    if (result.errors) {
      return Promise.reject(result.errors)
    }

    const markdownItems = result.data.allMarkdownRemark.edges

    // Create pages and blog post pages
    markdownItems.forEach(({ node }) => {
      if (node.frontmatter.layout === "page") {
        createPage({
          path: node.frontmatter.path,
          component: pageTemplate,
        })
      } else if (node.frontmatter.layout === "post") {
        createPage({
          path: node.fields.slug,
          component: blogPostTemplate,
          context: {
            slug: node.fields.slug,
          },
        })
      }
    })
  })
}
```

### Pagination with the blog posts

> What we desire is a blog section that lists all posts, really a paginated list of posts, and then let user select one to be read. The previous section creates a page for each post so we need to create the pages that list the posts. Again, we only need to update a bit the `createPages` method to create a new page for each set of six posts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you've created all your blog posts, you'll want a page that lists them. This can be accomplished by updating the `createPages` method to create a new page for each set of posts.

> Note that this example includes pagination.
```

> ```js

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```js:title=gatsby-node.js
```

exports.createPages = ({ graphql, actions }) => {
  const { createPage } = actions
  const blogListTemplate = path.resolve("./src/templates/blog-list.js")
  const blogPostTemplate = path.resolve(`src/templates/blog-post.js`)
  const pageTemplate = path.resolve(`src/templates/page.js`)

  return graphql(`...`).then(result => {
    if(result.errors) {
      return Promise.reject(result.errors)
    }

    const markdownItems = result.data.allMarkdownRemark.edges

    // Create blog-list pages
    const posts = markdownItems.filter(item => item.node.frontmatter.layout === 'post')
    const postsPerPage = 6
    const numPages = Math.ceil(posts.length / postsPerPage)
    Array.from({ length: numPages }).forEach((_, i) => {
      createPage({
        path: i === 0 ? `/blog` : `/blog/${i + 1}`,
        component: blogListTemplate,
        context: {
          limit: postsPerPage,
          skip: i * postsPerPage,
          numPages,
          currentPage: i + 1,
        },
      })
    })

    // Create pages and blog post pages
    ...
  })
}
```

> In Jekyll we used the text <!--more--> to mark the excerpt of the post. We can easily set up by configuring the plugin `gatsby-transformer-remark`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Jekyll sites use the text <!--more--> to mark an excerpt in a post. In order to reproduce that functionality, you can configure `gatsby-transformer-remark`:
```
